Let’s go back to our Bibles
to Hebrews 13:5, 6
and see the context of today’s text.
Here, in Hebrews chapter 13, it says:
“Let your way of life be free
“of the love of money, while you are content
“with the present things.
“For he has said: ‘I will never leave you,
“and I will never abandon you.’
“So that we may be of good courage and say:
“‘Jehovah is my helper; I will not be afraid.
What can man do to me?’”
Well, those are certainly encouraging words
in days of economic uncertainty.
We think about thousands of people
who are left homeless as a result of flooding
in such lands as the United States
(in Texas and Louisiana),
but also in Sierra Leone
(with massive landslides),
and our brothers in Colombia.
And we think about millions
who are still gripped by severe poverty
—people acting in desperation in Venezuela.
So this is
a very key promise for Jehovah’s people.
Let’s take a closer look at it
and how it’s helping our brothers.
When was it issued?
Why was it needed?
Who wrote these words?
Well, evidence points to the apostle Paul.
And from where did he write, and when?
Here, look at chapter 13, verses 23 and 24:
“I want you to know that our brother Timothy
“has been released
[“released”—so Paul was in prison].
If he comes soon,
I will be with him when I see you.”
So Paul was thinking
he was at the end of his own prison term.
And then verse 24, the latter part:
“Those in Italy send you their greetings.”
So for these and other reasons,
we conclude that Paul wrote Hebrews
in 61 C.E. right before he was released
from his first imprisonment in Rome.
How many times had Paul
been in jail up to this point?
Well, you recall that he had been in jail
with Silas in Philippi back around 50 C.E.
That would’ve been
during his second missionary journey.
Then, around 56 C. E.,
he spent two years in prison in Caesarea,
and then he went on
to have his case heard in Rome.
And that took a boat; he was shipwrecked;
he went to Malta,
eventually got on another boat,
and wound up in Rome, where he spent
another two years under house arrest,
which ended in 61 C.E.
And he would have been thrown in jail
one more time before he was martyred.
Well, why mention all of that?
Because Paul could talk
from experience about contentment.
He knew what it meant
to follow Jehovah’s direction,
even if it meant
being “low on provisions” at times.
He knew prison food.
He knew Philippi prison food;
he knew Caesarea prison food;
he knew Rome prison food.
Paul wrote to the Philippians also
when he was under house arrest.
And to the Philippians, he wrote the words
that we find in chapter 4, verses 11 and 12:
“I have learned [how] to be self-sufficient
“regardless of my circumstances.
“I know how to be low on provisions
“and how to have an abundance.
“In everything and in all circumstances
“I have learned the secret of both
“how to be full and how to hunger,
both how to have an abundance
and how to do without.”
Well, there is a secret, and Paul knew it.
Godly contentment is a twofold secret.
If we experience financial prosperity,
we need wisdom to know how to view that.
Some conclude, ‘Well, you know,
if I can afford it, why not buy it?’
But to those who know the secret,
the question is not always,
Am I living within my means?
but rather, Is Jehovah part of my plans?
Paul knew not only
“how to have an abundance”
but also “how to do without,”
how to be content with less.
And that means knowing
how to keep natural anxiety in perspective.
A content person will never overreact
as a result of financial loss.
So back to the Hebrews.
Why did the Hebrews need this counsel?
Well, think of the timing—61 C.E.
What had occurred 20,
15 years prior to this
—41-54 C.E.?
The “great famine”
—the “great famine” mentioned
at Acts 11:28, 29—
a famine so severe that Christians
from other parts of the world
were sending relief supplies
to our brothers in Judea,
a famine that lasted for years.
Had memories of this famine
made the brothers there in Judea,
the ones to whom Paul
wrote the letter to the Hebrews,
concerned about money?
Might there be a lesson in that for us?
Well, no matter how poor we may be,
we should never come to love money
or become so preoccupied with money.
Instead, we should concentrate
on being rich toward Jehovah.
Do we have any recent examples of that
—examples of those who are showing
how they’re “content with the present things”
and that they know
“the secret of . . . how to do without”
—of people who are
putting spiritual interests first?
Well, consider the situation
of our brothers in Venezuela.
The International Monetary Fund projects
that inflation
will soon exceed 2,000 percent
in Venezuela.
That means that something
that you once paid $3.00 for,
you will soon pay $63.00 for.
Security, of course,
is a major concern for our brothers.
People are acting in desperation.
Armed gangs will ransack any building
that they think
has something of value inside.
An unexpected situation arose
because of the theme
of this year’s convention,
“Don’t Give Up!,”
which in Spanish is “¡No se rinda!”
And “¡No se rinda!”
is the theme that has been adopted
by the opposition
political party, coincidentally.
So the convention location
in one of the cities had actually—
They canceled our contract
when the administrator saw
what he presumed to be
the opposition party’s campaign slogan.
Well, it was only when a sister,
who gives private schooling
to the state governor’s children,
explained our neutral stand to his wife
that the misunderstanding was clarified
and the convention went ahead as planned
—clear thinking in a time of panic
and in a time of economic uncertainty
putting spiritual things first.
And all of our brothers benefited spiritually
from her clear thinking.
Circuit overseers
report on the generous spirit
of the congregations
as the friends share what little they have.
In spite of all the chaos, the brothers
are showing admirable resilience.
And the branch writes:
“Spiritually, [this is a quote]
“we have never been so prosperous.
“Meeting attendance, field service activity,
“and the number
of regular pioneers are on the increase.
“People who have shown little interest
in the past have asked to study the Bible.
“New faces are seen at meetings,
assemblies, and conventions.
“We hear many sincere
expressions of appreciation
“for all the provisions
to strengthen our faith.
The brothers are so happy to be in the truth”
—“content with the present things.”
Well, why did Paul’s advice in his letter
to the Hebrews prove to be timely?
Think of the timing—61 C.E.
What happened in 66 C.E.?
The Roman army
of Cestius Gallus surrounded Jerusalem.
Jesus told his disciples what to watch for
and what to do when it finally happened.
Now their survival depended
not on the stability of their employment,
nor on the value
of their material possessions,
but on their obedience.
Having kept their spirituality strong,
having maintained
a rich condition toward Jehovah,
the obedient ones knew exactly what to do.
Well, we don’t know
what the future will hold for us.
Habakkuk 3:17 says
that ‘the fields may not produce food’
for more of us before the end comes.
But we can continue
to see how Jehovah fulfills his promise:
“I will never leave you,
. . . I will never abandon you.”
And when we understand that,
then we can truly be
“content with the present things.”